# 2024 NASA Space Apps Challenge Submission
Team: Aistis Meiklejohn, Abtin Turing, JC Abanto, Reid Playter

Website: https://soilvantage-bc523.web.app/

Our hackathon project is a website that predicts volumetric soil moisture percentage for any given longitude, latitude, and month within North America, using a machine learning model trained on data sourced from NASA's Giovanni. Along with moisture predictions, the site offers guidance on soil types and irrigation that relates to optimizing soil moisture levels, making it a valuable resource for new farmers and home gardeners. The goal is to lower the barriers to growing food by providing easy-to-understand, actionable information that would otherwise require costly, high-tech tools or significant experience. By empowering individuals and communities across North America to grow their own food, the project promotes healthier eating, supports environmental sustainability through locally grown plant-based foods, and encourages richer soil and crop diversity.

**Technical Details**

For the front-end, we used Svelte. We implemented some components from ShadCN. Additionally, we collaborated on front-end animations that were crafted using Rive. These animations were then seamlessly imported into our Svelte application, displaying water streams through the soil, as well as leaves animating. To communicate with out backend, we made HTTP requests to our model hosted on the cloud and displayed the results.

For the backend tools, we used scikit-learn to build our machine learning model. We used a random forest regression since we thought it'd be able to catch the spatial patterns within the data and explain the large spread in variance in the data. As for the actual data, we downloaded 36 datasets from NASA's Giovanni. The 36 datasets cover three years' monthly average soil data from North America, giving our model over 3 million data points. The explanatory variables are latitude, longitude, and month. The response variable is the volumetric soil measure percentage. We trained our model on half of the unordered data because of computational and time limitations (primarily CPU). For the model, we fine-tuned the hyperparameters using grid search and a 5-fold cross-validation on half of the dataset. The model generated a reasonable mean squared error, R2 = 0.912, and an accuracy of roughly 85% given a 7% threshold. How that threshold works is if our prediction is 43% and the actual recorded soil moisture percentage is 50% or 36%, it would count as accurate since the dataset accounts for a 25km radius. To get the model on our website, we needed to host the model on the cloud. We first saved the model with pickle. We then uploaded it to Google Cloud Storage and used Google Cloud Run to have our front-end requests execute a function to generate our predictions. All of the code written above was in Python. 
